[music]
>> Pushkin.
I am, I am proud to say,
a YIMBY.
Yes, in my backyard.
I've come to my YIMBYness recently, so I
have all the zeal of the recently
converted. YIMBY stands for building as
much housing as is humanly possible,
reforming stupid zoning laws, outdated
building codes. YIMBY hates minimum lot
sizes, setback zoning, mandatory parking
requirements, rent control, anything
that makes building new things more
expensive.
>> [music]
>> YIMBY thinks that when it comes to
cities, America peaked around 1910,
>> [music]
>> and we should just roll back the zoning
clock 100 years.
YIMBY walks through one of those
absurdly picturesque New England
villages or some breezy Southern
California beach town. By the way,
YIMBY only ever walks, or maybe cycles.
>> [music]
>> YIMBY never drives. And asks, "Where are
the multi-family apartment buildings?"
My social media feed is basically just
other YIMBYs. Shout out to Alicia
Courtyard Urbanist from Chicago, who
posts something about how building
European-style courtyard apartment
buildings will save the American
Republic every day.
And I am so down for every one [music]
of those tweets.
YIMBY stands at the intersection of
[music] righteous indignation and
nerdiness, a street corner where I have
lived my entire adult life.
I am YIMBY.
Hear me roar.
>> [music]
>> So, deep into this ever-expanding series
on mistakes, I asked myself, "What would
YIMBY's idea of a mistake be? What
error, what miscalculation would most
enrage the universe of YIMBY?"
Upon consultations with my YIMBY
comrades,
I found it.
A single line on a building code
proposal filled out by a fire inspector
in Glendale, Arizona, named
Gregory A. Victor,
concerning,
wait for it,
elevators.
This is the story of the great American
elevator tragedy.
>> Yeah, I could not find a high-income
country that had fewer elevators per
capita than the United States.
>> Meet one of the crown princes of YIMBY,
my new best friend, Stephen Smith,
director of the Center for Building in
North America. He will guide us through
the tangled history leading up to Mr.
Victor's
massive error.
>> Greece has about half the elevators that
the United States does, which is pretty
surprising since Greece has a population
of around 10 million and the US is, I
don't know, 340 million.
>> That's incredible.
>> Yeah, I mean it it Yeah, I mean, a lot
of a lot of people in Greece live in a
little four-story, four-unit apartment
building with a
>> [snorts]
>> tiny little elevator.
>> This is Revisionist History, my podcast
about things overlooked and
misunderstood.
Some of you may be thinking,
>> [music]
>> "I'm not seriously going to listen to
half an hour on elevators, am I?"
And my answer to you is, "Oh, yes, you
are."
And at the end, you will turn to your
loved ones and you will say,
"I too am now YIMBY. [music]
Hear me roar."
What do your friends say about your
elevator
>> I don't talk about building codes to
friends.
>> Do you
>> It's a good way to not have friends, you
know.
>> Wait, are you
You are you You cannot be serious. You
don't You don't have long conversations
about elevators with your friends.
>> Of course I do. I drive them nuts about
it. Elevators, you know, sometimes
they'll ask a question about something,
and you have a little fun fact for them,
but it's not a good way to keep friends
to talk about elevator standards.
>> Stephen, I am the odd exception. Should
I ever be at a party with you?
>> Should I ever be at a party with you,
you have
you have carte blanche to trap me in a
corner and talk about elevators for 2
hours.
>> about that.
I'm going to talk about something way
more obscure. I'm going to talk about
like handrails or windows or, you know,
pushing it beyond elevators.
>> My my
>> [laughter]
>> my producer is laughing in the
background.
The modern elevator is an American
invention.
The earliest elevators were made in the
mid-19th century by Elisha Otis of
Vermont, whose startup Otis Elevators
remains one of the world's largest
elevator companies.
Otis installed the world's first
commercial elevator in the Howard
Building on the corner of Broadway and
Broome Street in Manhattan's SoHo, which
still stands.
The vertical city in New York that grew
up around the Howard Building was made
possible by Otis's invention.
But at some point between then and now,
the era of American elevator dominance
began to sputter.
If you are an ordinary working American
who lives in a split-level out in the
suburbs and works in an office park,
maybe you didn't notice.
But you know who did?
YIMBY noticed. In particular, Stephen
Smith.
This goes back a few years, just after
Smith had started a small YIMBY think
tank, Center for Building in North
America.
He'd been a journalist, then real
estate, but his true passion, he
realized, lay elsewhere.
Building codes.
>> I mean, academia doesn't study building
codes. The more prestigious you are as
an as an academic architect, you know,
the more esoteric you're getting and,
you know, degrowth theory and, you know,
things that are kind of divorced from
the actual practice of putting one brick
on another and nailing a piece of wood.
Um
So, you know, academia didn't cover it.
I don't know who else was going to get
into it. And you don't really get into
construction cuz you love reading and
writing. So, there's just not a whole
lot written about it. Uh so, I decided
to do it myself.
>> shop, and right away something caught
his eye.
>> There was some uh it was a post on when
it back when it was called Twitter. And
it was still good for this kind of
thing. That went viral with some uh
developer who had built a a little
three-story 12-unit apartment building
in Minneapolis and was sort of bragging
about, you know, it's pretty affordable.
And he was kind of listing
uh he was talking about the simplicity
of the project. You know, he was like,
"It doesn't have any parking. Great.
Uh doesn't have an elevator." And
it it kicked up sort of like a firestorm
on uh Twitter. If you
"Elevator, what about disabled?" You
know, I guess disabled people can just
go and die. Whatever. And I remember
thinking like, "Well, three-story
building in America, I mean, they never
have elevators. That's not that
unusual." But um
at the time I would happen to be in
France. I was thinking, "Well, wait a
minute. A new three-story building in
France generally does have an elevator."
Um so, why is that? And I asked uh my
friend who's the the architect, you
know, "How much does an elevator cost in
Italy for a three-story building?" He
was like, "I don't know, 20, 30,000
euros." I said, "Well, there must be
some misunderstanding. There's no way an
elevator costs 20 or 30,000 euros in
Italy. That doesn't make any sense.
That's a small fraction." You know, in
the US that
I don't know, 120, 150,000 dollars.
>> Why on earth would an elevator be five
times the cost in America as it is in
Europe? He went back home, moved
apartments, and suddenly the question
was all he could think about.
So, you live in Brooklyn?
>> I live in Brooklyn. I live in a
five-story building. There are two units
on each floor. It's on a very small lot.
It's on a lot that's roughly the
footprint of the building is about 1,200
sq ft and there are five stories, seven
apartments over a very popular vintage
store.
Um
>> What floor are you on?
>> I'm on the third floor.
Um
and in Europe, it would have been hard
to stick an elevator in the building,
but you could have done it. I've seen
I've seen floor plans from France
especially, they're very good at
sticking a you know, a little spiral
staircase in a very small elevator. You
could have gotten an elevator in the
building. There is no way in hell you
building with anything even conceivably
close to our current rules. But in
France, they would have done it. In
France, this building would have an
elevator, I believe.
>> And for Stephen this was a problem.
And with the result that when you you
had a period of your life as I read in
the elevator report, where you were
effectively disabled.
>> Yes, I had a some mysterious virus in
2017, turned out to be the sort of long
COVID-like illness, obviously not from
COVID cuz it was 2017.
And yeah, I had I still do have
a disease called POTS, where you stand
up and your heart rate goes wild, a lot
of fatigue, probably an autoimmune
disease that has not really been
understood very well yet. And yeah, it
was difficult. Um
you know, there were definitely days
where what happens is when you exert
yourself, you pay for it physically in
kind of intense ways. You get sort of
brain fog and
extreme fatigue, you know, I might sleep
12, 13 hours a day.
Um
and so yeah, there were days when like I
think it would have been nice to go for
a walk and I didn't cuz I was on the
third floor.
>> Yeah.
In one of the most desirable
neighborhoods in the wealthiest city in
the premier country in the world
there is a brand new apartment building
that is effectively off-limits,
segregated from anyone who is not fit
enough to walk up multiple flights of
stairs.
And why?
Because the United States has somehow
given up on the widespread adoption of a
technology that it invented 150 years
ago.
But you're building
No old person
could ever move into your building.
>> I think I'm the oldest person who lives
in the building.
>> are you?
>> 37.
>> I mean, this is
>> I think I'm the oldest.
>> Steven, this is the whole This whole
thing is just nuts.
Yes,
it is nuts.
Smith spent two years
>> [music]
>> trying to answer the question of why
Americans gave up on the elevator.
The result, entitled Elevators,
>> [music]
>> is maybe the most comprehensive and
I'm not just saying this because I'm
NIMBY
fascinating exploration [music]
of a topic that I'm guessing few of you
have ever thought about.
pages, beginning with a sentence right
out of some 19th century novel.
In late 2020, tired of my old Brooklyn
apartment, historic and charming, but
loud and full of maintenance hassles,
I put my co-op unit on the market and
set out to buy
a new condo.
Some of the reasons why American
elevators are so expensive are not
surprising.
Chapter four of Smith's magnum opus is
entitled Labor.
Labor is the elephant in the room of the
elevator industry, he writes.
The workforce that builds and maintains
elevators is small and specialized and
highly unionized. And nowhere are those
things more true than in the United
States.
The most cost-effective way to build an
elevator is to assemble the whole thing
in a factory,
then ship it to the building site and
drop it in with a crane.
That's what they do in Europe.
But in the United States, the elevator
union insists on assembling the
elevators themselves.
So, everything is assembled in the
factory, shipped to the building site,
then disassembled,
and put back together in the cramped
confines of the elevator shaft.
>> Where it's really bad is the sort of
sister industry of the elevators, which
is the escalators. I mean, an escalator
truly is almost fully assembled in a
factory abroad and then craned onto
site. And in North America, you're
taking it apart. There was this I found
a sort of newsletter from the IUEC, the
you know, the North American Union,
where the the guy who runs it or, you
know, one of the another general
president or something is um sort of
bragging to his membership, you know,
he's trying to promote his leadership,
and he says, "You know, you don't know
how hard it is to convince an arbitrator
um that, you know, you got to take apart
this escalator."
>> At that point, we were interrupted.
>> I apologize. Somebody's ringing my
doorbell. One second.
Okay. I don't know whether that package
was for me, but they're going to leave
it in the lobby cuz I don't have an
elevator in my building.
Um
>> Where were we? This is like my kids with
with their with their with their
Magna-Tiles or their LEGO. Like, they at
the end of the day,
they take whatever they built and they
smoosh it,
>> Yeah.
>> and then they rebuild it the next day.
>> Yes.
>> Exactly like my kids with their
Magna-Tiles.
>> There are parts of the elevator I've
seen in in settlement agreements or
lawsuits. You know, most of the stuff
happens
behind closed doors or literally in a in
a in a tight shaft, and you don't get a
lot of insight into it, but you you see
it in court cases and settlement
agreements that should not be posted
online, but are sometimes. And
there's there's
there's this one uh
I don't know, arbitration case or legal
case, I don't know what it was, um where
you know, they're saying something like,
you know, it's common practice for us to
take something apart and put it all
together, but you need to prove that you
took it apart cuz otherwise, what's to
say you didn't just hang out playing on
your cell phone in the shaft. And so,
you know, the practice is for you to
sign your name on the part. So, if you
take it apart, the manager can see how
you really took it apart.
>> Now, as crazy as this is, it doesn't
really answer the question. Yes, the
elevator unions are stronger in the US
than Europe. Elevator technicians get
paid more. American elevator workers
insist on doing dumb things like taking
apart already built elevators like small
children with their Magna-Tiles.
But, none of these things explain why an
American elevator would be five times
more expensive than its European
counterpart. There has to be an even
more important reason. And oh, yes,
there is.
>> European cabins are roughly half. For,
let's say, for a new six-story apartment
building with a couple of units per
floor, the cabin size in Europe is is
about half the size, really the whole
rest of the world, is about half the
size that it is in the US and Canada.
And that's because, number one, they
don't require um
space
for ex-
I mean, it's for accessibility, but
exactly what it is is never really
written down, but probably something
like a turning radius for a wheelchair.
The European one will accommodate a
wheelchair. In fact, that's what it's
designed for, but um you'll probably
have to either back in or back out,
>> [music]
>> uh one or the other.
>> In Europe, Steven Smith's building would
have an elevator because Europeans are
willing to live with pint-sized
elevators.
>> [music]
>> In America, we aren't.
Which seems to make good sense, right?
Because what if you had a heart attack
and you're on a stretcher? You'd want
your exit from your fifth-floor
apartment [music]
to be as speedy and efficient as
possible.
Except that in insisting that elevators
be really large for those very rare
occasions when a large elevator would be
really convenient, you make the elevator
so bulky that it [music] can't fit in a
lot of smaller buildings. And so
expensive that no one trying to build
affordable housing has the means to put
an elevator in their building.
With the result that if you're in a
wheelchair, you simply [music] can't
live in Steven Smith's building. And if
you have a heart attack on the fifth
floor, the medics are going to have to
drag you down five flights of stairs.
Have you ever heard the expression,
[music] the perfect is the enemy of the
good? This is American elevator policy.
This is like saying,
>> [music]
>> "Too many people are dying in car
accidents. Let's mandate that everyone
has to drive to the store in a tank."
Problem solved, right? Well, that
problem solved, [music] but now you have
a million other bigger problems, like
massively congested highways, torn up
roads, [music] no parking, and most of
all, since a tank costs $50 million,
only
only super rich people
would be able to drive to the store.
[music]
In the spirit of trying to make the
world
a fairer place, we've made the world in
this one dimension
a much less fair place.
>> I would say so.
>> Yes.
>> [laughter]
>> You know, if you're sort of elderly,
maybe you'll go into cardiac arrest, and
it would be helpful to have a an
elevator that can accommodate a fully
strut flat stretcher, so you know,
someone can continue to do chest
compressions on you while you go down,
but
um you know, most people will never be
in that situation, or frankly, if they
are, they'll die anyway. The
out-of-hospital cardiac arrest survival
rate is is very low. Um
but you know, pretty much everyone gets
to a point, or at least if you're lucky
in life, where you can't really use the
stairs, but you could, you know, stand
with a walker in a small elevator.
Um so, yeah, we really look for these
edge cases, try to solve them, and then
kind of throw our hands up when people
don't have elevators at all, and say,
"Oh, it's just a greedy developer,"
whatever, and just kind of ignore the
underlying economics of the situation,
which was that if you make the elevator
three to four times as expensive, you
get a lot fewer elevators.
>> [music]
>> Trying to get to perfect when good is
good enough is a mistake.
And the road to mega elevators was lined
with a hundred mistakes made over many
years. But the one that really provoked
my YIMBY ire
was the mistake detailed on page 50 of
Stephen Smith's Elevators,
section 3.3.2, [music]
committed in the heedless pursuit of
perfection by a certain Gregory [music]
A. Victor,
fire inspector
of Glendale, Arizona.
>> [music]
>> You want to design an apartment building
in, say, Topeka, Kansas.
You can't just put the stairs and
windows and the fire exits wherever you
want. You have to adhere to a set of
common standards.
And those standards are found in a very
big book, written and maintained and
updated by a nonprofit called the
International Code Council, based in
Washington D.C., in one of those bland
office buildings not far from the
capital.
>> Anytime you see an international in a
word in the United States related to
construction, it's a lie. It's the US
building code, but it's called the
International Building Code, the IBC. It
has international aspirations.
Everywhere in the country used to have
its own building code, more or less, and
then they've sort of become homogenized,
harmonized over time. And so now there's
a national code called the International
Building Code, which forms
the basis and really the vast, vast
majority of every code of
>> If you walk down a street and hate the
way modern buildings look, or you don't
understand why corridors in the hallway
of your apartment building are so long,
then you have a problem with the
International Code Council.
The ICC is one of those shadowy groups
that no one has ever heard about that
writes the rules of the modern world.
And the document that they have so
grandiosely named the International
Building Code is, crucially, not set in
stone.
Interested parties can propose
amendments. Those amendments can be
voted on by a special committee or by
the general members of the ICC. The
International Building Code is not like
the Constitution of the United States,
which was last amended in 1992 based on
a proposal first made in 1789.
You need a war or a couple of centuries
to change the US Constitution.
Not so the International Building Code.
It is a living document.
And one of those people who set out to
take advantage of this fact was Gregory
A. Victor of the Glendale Fire
Department.
Greg Victor had white blonde hair,
mustache, aviator glasses. He grew up in
the Phoenix area, served in the Air
Force as an electrician at Bien Hoa Air
Force Base during the Vietnam War.
Came home and became a fire inspector
for the Glendale, Arizona Fire
Department retiring as the city's fire
marshal in 2007.
Quote, "He was the driving force behind
the fire safety codes that are used in
Glendale today." his obituary reads.
"On a national level, he was
instrumental in passing fire code to
assure firefighters safety in
skyscrapers after 9/11."
Let me just say that we of the YIMBY
movement
>> [music]
>> have no beef with Greg Victor
personally.
He served his country, his community,
his profession. I am quite [music] sure
he was a fine and outstanding man.
But he wanted perfection.
And he didn't understand that perfection
comes with what is sometimes an
unbearable cost.
So this guy, this let's just So we have
a we have a someone who cares who is
passionate about
elevators.
>> Yeah, he proposes he says um
you know, at the time elevators were
made to accommodate stretchers that are
6 ft 4 in
long.
And he says, well, they're building a
stadium in my jurisdiction.
>> He files an amendment with the
International Building Code.
>> At the time, I don't believe Glendale
had any apartment buildings with
elevators. Maybe it had one or two. It
had very few if any. It still has very
few if any. And he said, uh, the
elevator's not going to accommodate our
stretchers.
And I don't think, I mean, I think
that's maybe true in some sense, like
when it's fully flat and extended, I
find it difficult to believe that it did
not accommodate a stretcher in any
sense. I mean, stretchers do sort of
prop up a bit. Sometimes they're a bit
collapsible, but in any case, he did not
feel it adequately accommodated the
stretcher. So, he said, um, you know,
the the code should just say that the
elevator must accommodate whatever
stretcher the jurisdiction's got. And
this is not in the report. And I I want
to say don't quote me, but I'm saying it
in a public forum, so whatever, I'll
just say it. What I was told was at the
time the elevator industry this was in
the early 2000s
the elevator industry had their own
event, and so there weren't a lot of
people from the elevator industry to
push back.
So, um, there was some committee, some
technical committee that's supposed to
review this proposal. That's I think the
most informed people in the process
generally. And they said, well, there's
two things wrong with this. Number one,
we can't just say it's got to
accommodate the bigger stretcher you've
got. I mean, they didn't say this, but
you know, what if someone orders a 20-ft
stretcher? I mean, the lack of
standardization is going to drive
everyone crazy. But secondly, you didn't
really prove anything exactly. Like, you
know, what is the harm? You know,
can you try to weigh the costs and
benefits? That wasn't done.
>> [music]
>> Um, so he comes back in another round
when it's a little more this this is
sort of a quasi-democratic body, so all
the building officials can vote. And he
says, okay, well, the technical
committee said no, but I come to you,
the membership, and say um
you know, well, I'll fix it. So, okay,
it's not going to be any size. It's just
going to be 7 ft. I mean, ours are I
think he said
theirs are [music] I don't remember, 6
ft 7, 6 ft 8. So, you know, 7 ft will be
big enough to I don't know, have an
oxygen tank on the end or something like
that.
>> [music]
>> Um and it passed.
>> The United States already had the
biggest elevators in the world, the most
expensive elevators in the world.
Elevators so big and so expensive that
whenever someone was putting up a small
apartment building or an affordable
apartment building, they look at the
numbers and shrug and say, "Eff it.
We'll just go with stairs."
And along comes Greg Victor of Glendale,
Arizona, and proposes to the most
powerful body in the whole world of
building codes,
"Let's make them even bigger and even
more expensive. Let's make them 7 ft
long." So, he comes back
and with an amendment saying, "Okay,
just make it 7 ft." Right. Right. Right.
Right. Uh he takes that to the
the
>> the sort of the the broader membership.
But, he kind of makes this He makes this
emotional case. Imagine if it was you.
And there's always an emotional appeal
in building codes and standards. I mean,
sometimes it's about fire. In this case,
it wasn't fire. In this case, it was,
you know, being um you know, having
going into cardiac arrest and someone
couldn't perform compressions on you or
you get some sort of musculoskeletal
injury from falling in a bathtub,
whatever. Uh you know, something could
happen. Uh so, it's an emotional appeal.
And the issue with emotional appeals is
they don't weigh things very well.
>> You can look it up.
>> [music]
>> International Building Code Code Change
Number G143-0304,
Section 3002.4.
[music]
The International Building Code
Amendment Form is divided into three
parts. Part one is where you write a
paragraph explaining your change.
Part two [music]
is where you give your reasons. And part
three is cost impact.
And you know what Greg Victor answers to
the cost impact question?
None.
N O N E.
Oh, Greg. No.
>> [music]
>> Revisionist History is produced by Nina
Bird Lawrence, Lucy Sullivan, and Ben
Naddaff Hafery. Our editor is Karen
Shakhurji. [music]
Fact checking by Angely Mercado. Our
executive producer is Jacob Smith.
Engineering by Nina Bird Lawrence.
Original music by Louis Guerra. Sound
design and mastering by Marcelo de
Oliveira.
I'm Malcolm [music] Gladwell.